
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
    <title>I290TA Information Organization Laboratory </title>
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="site.css"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="fancy.css"/>
    <script type="text/javascript" src="RDFa.js" async="async"/>
    <script type="text/javascript" src="jquery-1.11.1.min.js"/>
</head>
<body>
<article vocab="http://milowski.com/syllabus/">
<header>
    <h1>I290TA Information Organization Laboratory </h1>
</header>
<section>
    <h2>Overview</h2>
    <p><span property="semester">Fall</span>
        <span property="year">2014</span><br/>
        <span property="days-of-week">TuTh</span>
        <span property="hours">10:30-12</span><br/>
        <span propery="location">205 South Hall</span><br/>
        CCN: <span property="ccn">41659</span>
    </p>
    <section property="blurb" typeof="Description">
        <p>Students will learn about the theories of information organization
            and retrieval in the context of the Open Web Platform (OWP).  A
            variety of topics will be covered by exploring the capabilities of the
            OWP via various assignments and a final project.  The course is
            project-oriented and culminates in a final project that uses various
            technologies of the OWP to implement a complete system.  Students will
            develop skills in various OWP technologies (JavaScript, HTML, CSS,
            SVG), rapid prototyping, visualization, and utilization of data
            formats like XML and JSON.</p>
    </section>
</section>
<section>
    <h2>Instructors</h2>
    <p property="instructor" typeof="Instructor"><span property="name">R. Alexander Miłowski</span>
        <span property="email">milowski@ischool.berkeley.edu</span>
        <span property="twitter">@alexmilowski</span>
        <span property="officeHours">TTh 12:45-13:45; WTh by appointment</span>
    </p>
    <p property="instructor" typeof="Instructor"><span property="name">Ramit Malhotra</span>
        <span property="email">ramit@ischool.berkeley.edu</span>
        <span property="twitter">@ramit_malhotra</span>
    </p>
</section>
<section property="description" typeof="Description">
    <h2>Description</h2>
    <p>Exploring and applying theories of information organization and retrieval in the context
        of the modern ecosystem of the Web, mobile applications, <q>big data</q> technologies
        requires a variety of skills. This course will focus on the Open Web Platform (OWP) as a
        nexus of standards and technologies that serve as a contract between producers and
        consumers of information and services. The goal of the class is to provide a baseline of
        skills and an awareness of where to go for more information that calumniates in a final
        project of a working system.</p>
    <p>As part of this exploration of the Web, focus first on various browser technologies of
        the OWP such as HTML, SVG, CSS, and JavaScript. We will explore the use of various
        annotation technologies like RDFa and JSON-LD and applications that receive data via
        services that return data in XML or JSON formats. The focus will be on how the OWP can
        serve as vehicle for both delivery of content and applications.</p>
    <p>Follow this, we explore data exchange architectures for delivering services over the Web.
        We will build XML and JSON data services using scripting, XSLT, XQuery, XProc, and
        <q>NoSQL</q> databases. This will give the student full exposure to <q>the whole
            stack</q> from the browser to the database.</p>
    <p>There will also be various special topics such as using mapping technologies like
        Leaflet and D3 and Open Street Maps for visualization of data. These technologies layer on
        various technologies of the OWP such as SVG and CSS. We will focus on how scripting can be
        used to orchestrate such libraries and evaluate the mapping between data services and such
        client-side APIs.</p>
    <p>The course is structured as a set of lectures, discussions, and lab sessions. The
        purpose of the lectures is give an overview of particular technologies, their history, use,
        and where to go for more information. Discussions and lab sessions will be used to address
        questions or particular applications within the context of homework, projects, or general
        interest.</p>
    <p>The course assignments are divided into two general categories:</p>
    <ol>
        <li>Homework — tasks focused on exploring a particular technology to gain particular
            hands-on experience.</li>
        <li>A Final Project — a single final project of a complete Web application implementing
            an idea of your choosing.</li>
    </ol>
</section>
<section>
    <h2>Homework</h2>
    <p>Schedule permitting, homework will be due <em>before</em> the class meeting date on
        which it is due and will typically be assigned early in the previous week. Each
        assignment is designed to focus on particular skills and completed without massive
        efforts.</p>
    <p>This is a course about using the Web. If you are asked to write about something for your
        homework, please turn in an HTML document. No PDF or other proprietary document formats
        will be accepted.</p>
    <p>Late homework will be marked down 1 point per day (e.g., 2 days late, 2 points off).  Other arrangements can be made by <em>prior agreement</em> if you find yourself unable to complete a homework assignment.  Such
        arrangements must happen <em>before</em> the due date.</p>
</section>
<section>
    <h2>The Project</h2>
    <p>A final project is a large portion of your grade and it is divided into two components:
        project milestones and the actual project itself.  Throughout the course,there will be
        project milestones where you will be expected to present a brief update about your
        project to the class.   Some of these project milestones may require turning in some
        version for further review.</p>
    <p>The purpose of these milestones is to:</p>
    <ul>
        <li>update your colleagues on your status,</li>
        <li>make them aware any issues,</li>
        <li>solicit feedback,</li>
        <li>share your knowledge.</li>
    </ul>
    <p>While the project milestones are for your benefit in making sure you making appropriate
        progress, they are still graded.  You are expected to make a professional presentation.
        That typical an appropriate number of slides that <em>briefly</em> inform your
        colleagues.</p>
    <p>The project milestones are:</p>
    <ol>
        <li>The pitch (P1) — pitch your idea or pitch yourself.</li>
        <li>Mockup (P2) — how are you going to solve the problem?</li>
        <li>Information Design (P3) — information model and UI design.</li>
        <li>Implementation Updates (P4) — update on the implementation, progress, and
            issues.</li>
    </ol>
    <p>The final project must consist of:</p>
    <ol>
        <li>A complete application.</li>
        <li>A working system that can be deployed and tested.</li>
        <li>A short paper describing your application (5-10 pages in length).</li>
    </ol>
    <p>Projects must be approved by the instructor to ensure that the scope is appropriate for
        the course so that you can be successful.</p>
    <p>Careful consideration should be used for the technologies used and the scope of the
        project. The project should demonstrate a sufficient level of mastery of the technologies
        discussed during the course lectures. If there are unforeseen problems, the project scope
        can be modified to make sure the application can be completed in time.</p>
    <p>If desired, students may form project teams (maximum 3 students per team) but the scope
        of the project must fit the team size.   Individual projects are also welcome.</p>
    <h3>Important Dates</h3>
    <ul>
        <li>09-16 and 09-18 — P1 due— pitches</li>
        <li>10-09           — P2 due — mockup</li>
        <li>10-30 and 11-04  — P3 due — information design</li>
        <li>11-25 and 12-02  — P4 due — implementation update</li>
    </ul>
</section>
<section>
    <h2>Grading</h2>
    <ul>
        <li>10% class participation - yes, you must show up!</li>
        <li>30% homework - each has equal value and is graded on a 10 point scale.</li>
        <li>20% project milestones</li>
        <li>40% final project</li>
    </ul>
</section>
<section>
<h2>Schedule</h2>
<section property="occurrence" typeof="Meeting Week0">
    <h3><span property="day">08-28</span>
        <a href="slides/introduction.xhtml" rel="lecture" typeof="SlideDeck" target="new"><span property="title">Introduction &amp; Overview</span></a>;
        <a href="slides/openwebplatform.xhtml" rel="lecture" typeof="SlideDeck" target="new"><span property="title">The Open Web Platform (OWP)</span></a>;
        <a href="slides/mesonet-demo.xhtml" rel="lecture" typeof="SlideDeck" target="new"><span property="title">Mesonet.info Demo</span></a>;
        <a href="slides/tools.xhtml" rel="lecture" typeof="SlideDeck" target="new"><span property="title">Tools</span></a>
    </h3>
    <p><a property="homework" href="homework-1.xhtml" typeof="Homework" target="new">
        Homework #1:<span property="title"> Get Setup!</span>; due <span property="due">09-04</span>
    </a>
    </p>
</section>
<section property="occurrence" typeof="Meeting Week1">
    <h3><span property="day">09-02</span>
        <a href="slides/html-intrinsic.xhtml" rel="lecture" typeof="SlideDeck" target="new"><span property="title">HTML and Intrinsic Vocabularies</span></a>;
        <a href="slides/xml-and-the-web.xhtml" rel="lecture" typeof="SlideDeck" target="new"><span property="title">XML and the Web</span></a>;
        <a href="slides/unicode.xhtml" rel="lecture" typeof="SlideDeck" target="new"><span property="title">Unicode</span></a>;
        <a href="slides/intro-git.xhtml" rel="lecture" typeof="SlideDeck" target="new"><span property="title">An Introduction to Git</span></a>
    </h3>
</section>
<section property="occurrence" typeof="Meeting Week1">
    <h3><span property="day">09-04</span>

        <a href="slides/theory-of-formatting.xhtml" rel="lecture" typeof="SlideDeck" target="new"><span property="title">Theory of Formatting</span></a>;
        <a href="slides/css-getting-your-style.xhtml" rel="lecture" typeof="SlideDeck" target="new"><span property="title">CSS: Getting your Style</span></a>;
    </h3>
    <p><a property="homework" href="homework-2.xhtml" typeof="Homework" target="new">
        Homework #2: <span property="title">Back to the Future with CSS3</span>; due <span property="due">09-11</span>
    </a></p>
    <section>
        <h4>Resources</h4>
        <section>
            <h5>HTML</h5>
            <ul>
                <li><a href="https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML" target="new">HTML @ Mozilla Developer Network (MDN)</a></li>
                <li><a href="https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Guide/HTML/HTML5" target="new">HTML5 @ Mozilla Developer Network (MDN)</a></li>
                <li><a href="http://www.html5rocks.com/en/">HTML5Rocks</a></li>
                <li><a href="http://html5.validator.nu" target="new">HTML5 Validator</a></li>
            </ul>
        </section>
        <section>
            <h5>CSS</h5>
            <ul>
                <li><a target="new" href="http://www.w3.org/Style/CSS/Overview.en.html">CSS Home Page at the W3C</a></li>
                <li><a target="new" href="http://www.w3.org/TR/CSS2/propidx.html">CSS2 Property Table</a></li>
                <li><a target="new" href="http://www.quirksmode.org/css/">Quirks Mode CSS</a></li>
                <li><a target="new" href="https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Reference">Mozilla CSS Reference</a></li>
                <li><a target="new" href="http://css-tricks.com">CSS Tricks</a></li>
                <li><a target="new" href="http://www.csszengarden.com">CSS Zen Garden</a></li>
            </ul>
        </section>
        <section>
            <h5>Testing</h5>
            <ul>
                <li><a href="http://www.webpagetest.org" target="new">WebPageTest</a> — test a web site in various browsers online</li>
                <li><a href="https://developer.chrome.com/devtools" target="new">Chrome Developer Tools</a></li>
                <li><a href="https://developer.apple.com/safari/tools/" target="new">Safari Developer Tools</a></li>
                <li><a href="https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Tools" target="new">Firefox Developer Tools</a></li>
                <li><a href="http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/dd565628(v=vs.85).aspx" target="new">Internet Explorer Developer Tools</a></li>
            </ul>
        </section>
    </section>
</section>
<section property="occurrence" typeof="Meeting Week2">
    <h3><span property="day">09-09</span>
        <a href="slides/javascript-basics.xhtml" rel="lecture" typeof="SlideDeck" target="new"><span property="title">JavaScript: The Basics</span></a>; <a href="slides/web-apis.xhtml" rel="lecture" typeof="SlideDeck" target="new"><span property="title">Web APIs</span></a>; <a href="slides/dom.xhtml" rel="lecture" typeof="SlideDeck" target="new"><span property="title">The Document Object Model
                  (DOM)</span></a>; <a href="slides/jquery-rescue.xhtml" rel="lecture" typeof="SlideDeck" target="new"><span property="title">JQuery to the
               Rescue?</span></a>; </h3>
</section>
<section property="occurrence" typeof="Meeting Week2">
    <h3><span property="day">09-11</span>
        <a href="slides/timers-events-callbacks.xhtml" rel="lecture" typeof="SlideDeck" target="new"><span property="title">Functions, Timers, Events, and Callbacks</span></a>; <a href="slides/pitching.xhtml" rel="lecture" typeof="SlideDeck" target="new"><span property="title">Pitching Projects</span></a>; <a href="slides/slidy.xhtml" rel="lecture" typeof="SlideDeck" target="new"><span property="title">Slidy for
                  Presentations</span></a>
    </h3>
    <p>
        <a property="homework" href="homework-3.xhtml" typeof="Homework" target="new">
            Homework #3: <span property="title">Scripting - To do? Or not TO DO?!</span>; due <span property="due">09-25</span>
        </a>
    </p>
</section>
<section property="occurrence" typeof="Meeting Week3">
    <h3><span property="day">09-16</span>
        <a href="slides/webarch-organizing.xhtml" rel="lecture" typeof="SlideDeck" target="new"><span property="title">Web Architecture and Organizing Information</span></a>;
        <a href="slides/working-with-resources.xhtml" rel="lecture" typeof="SlideDeck" target="new"><span property="title">Working with Resources</span></a>
    </h3>
    <p property="milestone" typeof="Presentation"><span property="title">Your Pitches (P1)</span> <span property="due" content="09-16">due</span></p>
</section>
<section property="occurrence" typeof="Meeting Week3">
    <h3><span property="day">09-18</span>
        <a href="slides/scoping-rules.xhtml" rel="lecture" typeof="SlideDeck" target="new"><span property="title">Scoping rules</span></a>;
        <a href="slides/closures.xhtml" rel="lecture" typeof="SlideDeck" target="new"><span property="title">Closures</span></a>;
        <a href="slides/git-homework.xhtml" rel="lecture" typeof="SlideDeck" target="new"><span property="title">Git for Homework</span></a>;
        <a href="slides/jquery-ajax.xhtml" rel="lecture" typeof="SlideDeck" target="new"><span property="title">jQuery and AJAX</span></a>

    </h3>
    <p property="milestone" typeof="Presentation"><span property="title">Your Pitches (P1)</span> <span property="due" content="09-18">due</span></p>
    <p>            <a property="homework" href="homework-4.xhtml" typeof="Homework" target="new">
        Homework #4: <span property="title">Accessing USGS Earthquake Data</span>; due <span property="due">10-02</span>
    </a></p>
</section>
<section property="occurrence" typeof="Meeting Week4">
    <h3><span property="day">09-23</span>
        <a href="slides/objects-prototypes.xhtml" rel="lecture" typeof="SlideDeck" target="new"><span property="title">Objects and Prototype</span></a>
    </h3>
    <p property="milestone" typeof="Presentation"><span property="title">Your Pitches (P1)</span>
        <span property="due" content="09-16">due</span></p>
</section>
<section property="occurrence" typeof="Meeting Week4">
    <h3><span property="day">09-25</span>
        <a href="slides/leaflet.xhtml" rel="lecture" typeof="SlideDeck" target="new"><span property="title">Introduction to Leaflet</span></a>;
        <a href="slides/visualizations-d3.xhtml" rel="lecture" typeof="SlideDeck" target="new"><span property="title">Visualization via D3</span></a>;
        Leaflet Activity
    </h3>
    <p><a property="homework" href="homework-5.xhtml" typeof="Homework" target="new">Homework #5: <span property="title">Mapping Earthquakes</span>; due <span property="due">10-09</span></a></p>
</section>
<section property="occurrence" typeof="Meeting Week5">
    <h3><span property="day">09-30</span>
        <a href="slides/encapsulation-more-than-breakfast.xhtml" rel="lecture" typeof="SlideDeck" target="new"><span property="title">Encapsulation — more than what's for breakfast!</span></a>;
        <a href="slides/css-advice.xhtml" rel="lecture" typeof="SlideDeck" target="new"><span property="title">Three bits of CSS advice</span></a>;
        <a href="slides/mockups.xhtml" rel="lecture" typeof="SlideDeck" target="new"><span property="title">What is a 'mockup'?</span></a>
    </h3>
</section>
<section property="occurrence" typeof="Meeting Week5">
    <h3><span property="day">10-02</span>
        <a href="slides/multitier-arch.xhtml" rel="lecture" typeof="SlideDeck" target="new"><span property="title">Multi-tiered Architectures</span></a>;
        Poster;
        <a href="slides/working-with-apis.xhtml" rel="lecture" typeof="SlideDeck" target="new"><span property="title">Working with Service APIs</span></a>;
        <a href="slides/twitter-data-collection.xhtml" rel="lecture" typeof="SlideDeck" target="new"><span property="title">Twitter Data Collection</span></a>
    </h3>
</section>
<section property="occurrence" typeof="Meeting Week6">
    <h3><span property="day">10-07</span>
        <a href="slides/nodejs.xhtml" rel="lecture" typeof="SlideDeck" target="new"><span property="title">Node.js</span></a>;
        <a href="slides/flask.xhtml" rel="lecture" typeof="SlideDeck" target="new"><span property="title">Flask</span></a>
    </h3>
</section>
<section property="occurrence" typeof="Meeting Week6">
    <h3><span property="day">10-09</span> Mockup Presentations (P2)

    </h3>
    <p property="milestone" typeof="Presentation"><span property="title">Mockup (P2)</span> <span property="due" content="10-09">due</span></p>
</section>
<section property="occurrence" typeof="Meeting Week7">
    <h3><span property="day">10-14</span>
        <a href="slides/local-knowledge.xhtml" rel="lecture" typeof="SlideDeck" target="new"><span property="title">Local Knowledge and Services</span></a>;
        <a href="slides/rdfa.xhtml" rel="lecture" typeof="SlideDeck" target="new"><span property="title">A Whirlwind Introduction to RDFa</span></a>;
        schema.org activity
    </h3>
</section>
<section property="occurrence" typeof="Meeting Week7">
    <h3><span property="day">10-16</span>
        <a href="slides/turtle.xhtml" rel="lecture" typeof="SlideDeck" target="new"><span property="title">Turtle</span></a>;
        <a href="slides/json-ld.xhtml" rel="lecture" typeof="SlideDeck" target="new"><span property="title">JSON-LD by Example</span></a>;
        <a href="slides/scripting-rdfa.xhtml" rel="lecture" typeof="SlideDeck" target="new"><span property="title">Scripting RDFa</span></a>;
        scripting activity
    </h3>
    <p><a property="homework" href="homework-6.xhtml" typeof="Homework" target="new">Homework #6: <span property="title">Triples in a Haystack</span>; due <span property="due">10-30</span></a></p>
</section>
<section property="occurrence" typeof="Meeting Week8">
    <h3><span property="day">10-21</span>
        Using Amazon Web Services (AWS EC2);
        XQuery by Example
    </h3>
</section>
<section property="occurrence" typeof="Meeting Week8">
    <h3><span property="day">10-23</span>
        A bit more about XQuery;
        <a href="http://www.w3.org/TR/XProc" target="xproc">XProc</a> &amp; <a href="http://www.github.com/alexmilowski/xproclet" target="xproc">XProclet</a>;
        Exercise: Using XQuery for the Web
    </h3>
</section>
<section property="occurrence" typeof="Meeting Week9">
    <h3><span property="day">10-28</span>
        Open Topics - TBD
    </h3>
</section>
<section property="occurrence" typeof="Meeting Week9">
    <h3><span property="day">10-30</span> Information Design Presentations</h3>
    <p property="milestone" typeof="Presentation"><span property="title">Information Design (P3)</span> <span property="due" content="10-30">due</span></p>
    <p>Homework #7: Querying the State Department; due 11-25</p>
</section>
<section property="occurrence" typeof="Meeting Week10">
    <h3><span property="day">11-04</span>
        Open Topics - TBD
    </h3>
</section>
<section property="occurrence" typeof="Meeting Week10">
    <h3><span property="day">11-06</span>
        <a href="slides/measuring-performance.xhtml" rel="lecture" typeof="SlideDeck" target="new"><span property="title">Measuring Performance</span></a>;
        <a href="slides/testing.xhtml" rel="lecture" typeof="SlideDeck" target="new"><span property="title">Testing</span></a>
    </h3>
</section>
<section property="occurrence" typeof="Meeting Week11">
    <h3><span property="day">11-13</span>
        <a href="slides/responsive-design.xhtml" rel="lecture" typeof="SlideDeck" target="new"><span property="title">Mobile First, Responsive Design, and Accessibility</span></a>
    </h3>
</section>
<section property="occurrence" typeof="Meeting Week12">
    <h3><span property="day">11-18</span>
        <span property="event" typeof="Event"><span property="title">Open Topics - TBD</span></span>
    </h3>
</section>
<section property="occurrence" typeof="Meeting Week12">
    <h3><span property="day">11-20</span>
        <a href="slides/cors.xhtml" rel="lecture" typeof="SlideDeck" target="new"><span property="title">Accessing Data and CORS</span></a>;
        <a href="slides/access-login.xhtml" rel="lecture" typeof="SlideDeck" target="new"><span property="title">Access Control and Login</span></a>;
        <a href="slides/cdns.xhtml" rel="lecture" typeof="SlideDeck" target="new"><span property="title">CDNs</span></a>;
        <a href="slides/polyfills-web-components.xhtml" rel="lecture" typeof="SlideDeck" target="new"><span property="title">Polyfills and Web Components</span></a>
    </h3>
</section>
<section property="occurrence" typeof="Meeting Week13">
    <h3><span property="day">11-25</span> Implementation Update Presentations</h3>
    <p property="milestone" typeof="Presentation"><span property="title">Implementation Updates (P4) and Fire Fighting</span> <span property="due" content="11-25">due</span></p>
</section>
<section property="occurrence" typeof="Meeting Week14">
    <h3><span property="day">12-02</span> Open Topics - TBD</h3>
</section>
<section property="occurrence" typeof="Meeting Week14">
    <h3><span property="day">12-04</span>
        <span property="event" typeof="Event"><span property="title">Course Wrap-up</span></span>
        <span property="event" typeof="Event"><span property="title">Final Project Presentations (Early Birds)</span></span>
    </h3>
</section>
<section property="occurrence" typeof="Meeting Final">
    <h3><span property="day">Final</span>
        <span property="event" typeof="Event"><span property="title">Final Project Presentations</span></span>
    </h3>
</section>
</section>
<section>
    <h2>Feedback</h2>
    <h3>We value your feedback. Please help us make IO-LAB an amazing experience for all of us!</h3>
    <form id="feedbackForm">
        <textarea rows="25" cols="105" id="feedbackText" name="feedbackText" placeholder="Enter your feedback here."/>
        <input id="feedbackX" name="x" type="hidden"/>
        <input id="feedbackY" name="y" type="hidden"/>
        <input id="feedbackOp" name="op" type="hidden"/>
        <p><span id="feedbackChallenge"/><input name="solution" size="10"/></p>
        <input type="submit" id="submitFeedback"/>
    </form>
</section>
<script type="text/javascript" src="syllabus.js"/>
<script type="text/javascript" src="hw-script.js"/>
</article>
</body>
</html>